Add rmw implementation tutorial (#5927)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Advanced/Creating-An-RMW-Implementation.rst

This guide is intended to be an entry point to kickstart the development of a new ``rmw`` implementation.
It will link to other pages and source code for more details where appropriate.

.. note::

    ROS 2 design articles on `design.ros2.org <https://design.ros2.org/>`_ are historical documents and may not reflect the current state of ROS 2.
    However, in some cases, they provide useful context and information, so they may still be referenced by this guide or by pages that this guide links to.

.. note::

    This guide intends to follow the latest state of the ``rmw`` interface; it may be different in older (non-Rolling) ROS 2 distributions.

The ``rmw`` interface
---------------------

The ``rmw`` interface is declared by the ``rmw`` package through `C header files <https://github.com/ros2/rmw/tree/rolling/rmw/include/rmw>`_.
Implementations of the C functions declared in these headers are provided by ``rmw`` implementations, which are separate packages.
For example, the ``rmw_fastrtps_cpp`` package implements the interface for eProsima Fast DDS.

> Example implementations

Reviewer: how about adding a bit of the explanation about difference of RMW Tier, https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers in here?

Author: Good idea. That is certainly good to mention here, i.e., for people intending to create an `rmw` implementation.

Please take a look at my change: 51d38732648b96b1237e28cbd701c924e85d1a9b

If more than one implementation is available at build-time and runtime selection is not disabled, which is the default with a typical ROS 2 binary installation, the ``rmw_implementation`` package acts as a proxy.
It dynamically loads the shared library for the :doc:`implementation selected at runtime <../../How-To-Guides/Working-with-multiple-RMW-implementations>` through the ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION`` environment variable or the default implementation if unset.
The ``rmw`` function implementations then look up the corresponding symbols in the loaded shared library using the ``dlsym()`` function.
This means that an implementation that does not implement all interface functions will only fail at runtime, when the symbol lookup fails, as opposed to failing at build-time (specifically at link-time) if runtime selection is disabled.

Features
--------

This section goes over the main features of the ``rmw`` interface, which the underlying middleware must support or deal with.
Depending on the middleware -- and how similar it is to the features expected by the interface -- the ``rmw`` implementation may be more or less trivial, i.e., it might have to do more "glue" work.

> For some non-critical features or configuration options, the implementation can indicate that they are not supported through ``rmw_feature_supported()`` or by returning ``RMW_RET_UNSUPPORTED``.

Reviewer: not related to this PR. i think we should add more feature types to be checked in this function such as LoanedMessage, ContentFiltering, Event types and so on. so that user application can negotiate available APIs in the rmw implementation, then adjust the behavior dynamically at runtime.

Author: I did find that this "is feature supported" API was a bit incomplete.

    #. Install and export target

        .. code-block:: cmake

            install(
              TARGETS ${PROJECT_NAME}
              EXPORT ${PROJECT_NAME}
              ARCHIVE DESTINATION lib
              LIBRARY DESTINATION lib
              RUNTIME DESTINATION bin
            )

            ament_export_targets(${PROJECT_NAME})
            # ament_export_libraries(${PROJECT_NAME})  # Old-style CMake

            # ...

Interface functions implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first step is to define the C interface functions declared in the ``rmw`` headers.
Start with empty functions that simply return ``RMW_RET_OK``, and then implement them one by one in the order in which they are likely to be called at runtime.
For example: ``rmw_init()``, ``rmw_create_node()``, ``rmw_create_publisher()``, ``rmw_create_subscription()``, and so on.
This will allow building and running/testing the implementation incrementally.

Most ``rmw`` functions have to perform input validation, as defined by the function's documentation.
There are various utility macros to simplify this, such as ``RMW_CHECK_ARGUMENT_FOR_NULL()`` and ``RMW_CHECK_TYPE_IDENTIFIERS_MATCH()``.

> ``rmw`` structs usually include a type-erased pointer (or something an opaque pointer) for ``rmw`` implementation-specific data.

Reviewer 2: Probably?

```suggestion
``rmw`` structs usually include a type-erased pointer (or sometimes an opaque pointer) for ``rmw`` implementation-specific data.
```

Author: Most definitely!

The implementation can place whatever it wants there, e.g., a pointer to an internal object that wraps the underlying middleware's publisher object and any relevant information, like type support.
This data/object can be fetched and used later when ``rmw_publish()`` is called with the corresponding ``rmw_publisher_t``.
To make sure that a different ``rmw`` implementation doesn't try to interpret this data, ``rmw_publisher_t`` includes the name of the implementation in its ``implementation_identifier`` field.

Type support
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type support structs can be confusing.
Here is an example for message type support for publishers/subscriptions.

A publisher is created through ``rmw_create_publisher()``, which takes in a handle for the type support information: ``const rosidl_message_type_support_t *``.
This is the base language-dependent type support: ``rosidl_typesupport_c`` / ``rosidl_typesupport_cpp``.
From this, we can get the concrete type support handle, depending on the available type supports, e.g., ``rosidl_typesupport_fastrtps_c`` / ``rosidl_typesupport_fastrtps_cpp`` and ``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_c`` / ``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_cpp``.

> The confusing part is that these are also ``const rosidl_message_type_support_t *``!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The confusing part is that these are also of type ``const rosidl_message_type_support_t *``!
```

Author: Thanks, that's clearer

``rmw_implementation_cmake``'s ``call_for_each_rmw_implementation()`` is called and is provided with this CMake function, which is called with each available implementation.
See the `CMakeLists.txt file <https://github.com/ros2/rmw_implementation/blob/rolling/test_rmw_implementation/CMakeLists.txt>`__.
Many other packages, including the ``test_rclcpp`` test-only package, also `use this mechanism <https://github.com/ros2/system_tests/blob/rolling/test_rclcpp/CMakeLists.txt>`__ to run tests against all available ``rmw`` implementations, otherwise tests are simply run with the default implementation.
Packages can also use ``get_available_rmw_implementations()`` to get the actual list of available implementations.

Some tests have implementation-specific code, which is done for various reasons, such as unsupported interface subsets.
These tests can use ``rmw``'s ``rmw_get_implementation_identifier()`` `function <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/p/rmw/generated/function_rmw_8h_1aeb8a815b9be5eb3f38ab28363ef63920.html>`__ for this.

Middleware- and ``rmw`` implementation-specific configuration
-------------------------------------------------------------

> The ``rmw`` interface does not allow for arbitrary configuration of the implementation or underlying middleware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``rmw`` interface as defined by that package does not support passing arbitrary configuration data to the implementation or the underlying middleware.
```

Author: Thank you, that is indeed more correct

They also depend on the ``rmw_implementation`` package to get the actual implementation.

The default implementation can be selected at build-time with the ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION`` CMake variable (e.g., ``-DRMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_other``) or the ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION`` environment variable.
If only one implementation is available at build-time, or if runtime selection is disabled (``-DRMW_IMPLEMENTATION_DISABLE_RUNTIME_SELECTION=ON``), the ``rmw_implementation`` target will be a simple ``INTERFACE`` library for the single implementation.
If more than one implementation is available at build-time and runtime selection is not disabled, which is the default with a typical ROS 2 binary installation, the ``rmw_implementation`` package acts as a proxy.
It dynamically loads the shared library for the :doc:`implementation selected at runtime <../../How-To-Guides/Working-with-multiple-RMW-implementations>` through the ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION`` environment variable or the default implementation if unset.
The ``rmw`` function implementations then look up the corresponding symbols in the loaded shared library using the ``dlsym()`` function.

> This means that an implementation that does not implement all interface functions will only fail at runtime, when the symbol lookup fails, as opposed to failing at build-time (specifically at link-time) if runtime selection is disabled.

Reviewer 3: This is all great info, but even knowing how it works already, it's a bit tough to follow I think (it's the subject matter, not the presentation). Maybe explaining how runtime selection works (with the env var and stuff) first, then following it up with how it is enabled/disabled/configured at build time would be easier to follow, something like:

```suggestion
By default, ROS 2 allows you to choose which rmw implementation to use at runtime.
This is convenient for comparing two implementations on the same machine and it lets ROS 2 distribute a single set of binaries that is compatible with multiple rmw implementations.
The :doc:`implementation is selected at runtime <../../How-To-Guides/Working-with-multiple-RMW-implementations>` through the ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION`` environment variable, or if that variable is unset a default rmw implementation is loaded.

This is accomplished by the ``rmw_implementation`` package, which acts as a proxy for an actual rmw implementation.
It works by creating placeholder ``rmw`` functions, and then when they are called it will ``dlopen()`` the appropriate library for the selected rmw implementation and then look up the corresponding symbols in the loaded shared library using the ``dlsym()`` function before calling them.

The ``rmw_implementation`` package can be configured at build-time to change the default option or disable runtime selection.
The default implementation can be selected at build-time with the ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION`` CMake variable (e.g., ``-DRMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_other``) or the ``RMW_IMPLEMENTATION`` environment variable.
If only one implementation is available at build-time, or if runtime selection is disabled (``-DRMW_IMPLEMENTATION_DISABLE_RUNTIME_SELECTION=ON``), the ``rmw_implementation`` target will be a simple ``INTERFACE`` library for the single implementation.

Because of the proxy mechanism and the CMake logic described above, an rmw implementation that does not implement all of the functions in the interface will only fail at runtime, when the symbol lookup fails, as opposed to failing at build-time (specifically at link-time) if runtime selection is disabled.
```

Author: I indeed struggled a bit with this :sweat_smile: especially because of the details of the build-time stuff. I think splitting it up like this is simpler, thank you. I just made minor modifications to your suggestion: 3815b316f16f1693afbb189a5923131756526cfd

This data/object can be fetched and used later when ``rmw_publish()`` is called with the corresponding ``rmw_publisher_t``.
To make sure that a different ``rmw`` implementation doesn't try to interpret this data, ``rmw_publisher_t`` includes the name of the implementation in its ``implementation_identifier`` field.

Type support
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type support structs can be confusing.
Here is an example for message type support for publishers/subscriptions.

A publisher is created through ``rmw_create_publisher()``, which takes in a handle for the type support information: ``const rosidl_message_type_support_t *``.
This is the base language-dependent type support: ``rosidl_typesupport_c`` / ``rosidl_typesupport_cpp``.
From this, we can get the concrete type support handle, depending on the available type supports, e.g., ``rosidl_typesupport_fastrtps_c`` / ``rosidl_typesupport_fastrtps_cpp`` and ``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_c`` / ``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_cpp``.
The confusing part is that these are also of type ``const rosidl_message_type_support_t *``!
However, the concrete type support handles are the ones that contain actual useful information.

> See `this example function <https://github.com/christophebedard/rmw_email/blob/f5e622bab24edaad8e0da054c7dbc698c6fb809c/rmw_email_cpp/src/type_support.cpp#L29-L62>`__, which extracts the concrete C or C++ dynamic message type support handle (``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_{c,cpp}``) given a base type support handle (``rosidl_typesupport_{c,cpp}``).

Reviewer 3: This part of the system is definitely a bit too clever I think, but that's how it is for now and I believe you've described it correctly.

The ``rmw`` `API includes function-level documentation <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/p/rmw/generated/index.html#functions>`_, but there is no higher-level documentation on the features of the interface and what it expects from the underlying middleware.

This guide is for developers who want to implement the ``rmw`` interface for a specific middleware.
It will first go over the ``rmw`` interface and how it works.
Then it will cover the main concepts or features that a middleware implementation must support.
Finally, it will go over some implementation details, including how to create an implementation skeleton and some tips to implement the interface functions.

This guide is intended to be an entry point to kickstart the development of a new ``rmw`` implementation.
It will link to other pages and source code for more details where appropriate.

.. note::

    ROS 2 design articles on `design.ros2.org <https://design.ros2.org/>`_ are historical documents and may not reflect the current state of ROS 2.
    However, in some cases, they provide useful context and information, so they may still be referenced by this guide or by pages that this guide links to.

.. note::

>     This guide intends to follow the latest state of the ``rmw`` interface; it may be different in older (non-Rolling) ROS 2 distributions.

Reviewer 4: I'm going to suggest we just drop this note; it will be outdated as soon as we branch off for Lyrical.  And while the RMW interface has changed over time, I don't think it has changed drastically, which is evidenced by the fact that `rmw_zenoh` was pretty straightforward to backport all the way to Humble:

```suggestion
```

Author: Even if Rolling is currently similar to Humble, the idea was really to make this explicitly a Rolling-only thing and mark other distros as being out of scope (since this page will show up in other distros' docs). I would expect someone looking into creating an implementation to focus on Rolling, at least at first. This is kind of separate from the tutorial itself becoming outdated over time for Rolling itself, unless I/we keep it up to date. However, I can remove this.

Author: see 09a4af018f0210a249033f35f2bfb42865249aaf

Reviewer 4: > Even if Rolling is currently similar to Humble, the idea was really to make this explicitly a Rolling-only thing and mark other distros as being out of scope (since this page will show up in other distros' docs). I would expect someone looking into creating an implementation to focus on Rolling, at least at first. This is kind of separate from the tutorial itself becoming outdated over time for Rolling itself, unless I/we keep it up to date. However, I can remove this.

While I somewhat agree in principle, in practice what happens at release time is that the entire `rolling` branch is branched off to a new `lyrical` branch.  So the only way to keep it out of Lyrical would be to explicitly delete it after the branch is created, and it is unlikely someone will remember to do that.

That said, I see that you've removed the warning so I'm not going to beat this dead horse anymore :).

Author: > So the only way to keep it out of Lyrical would be to explicitly delete it after the branch is created, and it is unlikely someone will remember to do that.

I intended for this to be backported to all distros' docs/branches and basically be an exact copy of the `rolling` version (even though this page specifically targets Rolling only), so that wasn't going to be an issue.

But, yeah, whatever

The ``rmw`` interface
---------------------

> The ``rmw`` interface is declared by the ``rmw`` package through `C header files <https://github.com/ros2/rmw/tree/rolling/rmw/include/rmw>`_.

Reviewer 4: Here, and elsewhere, let's use the {REPOs_FILE_BRANCH} macros so this will be backportable:

```suggestion
The ``rmw`` interface is declared by the ``rmw`` package through `C header files <https://github.com/ros2/rmw/tree/{REPOS_FILE_BRANCH}/rmw/include/rmw>`_.
```

Author: This is related to my other reply. I really intended for this to be Rolling-specific.

Author: I used `{DISTRO}` instead, because `{REPOS_FILE_BRANCH}` has been equivalent to it since the change from `master` to `rolling` (#2802), and `{DISTRO}` is shorter. See 09a4af018f0210a249033f35f2bfb42865249aaf

* Source & received timestamps: publication & subscription reception timestamps, respectively

* Publication & reception sequence numbers

This means that service request metadata includes the GID of the client that made the request and the request sequence number.
Service response metadata also includes the client GID & sequence number of the request it is responding to.

This metadata is available as structs through ``rmw_take_with_info()`` for subscription messages and ``rmw_take_{request,response}()`` for service requests/responses, which are wrapped & provided to user callbacks by the client libraries.

Part of this metadata might be natively supported and provided by the underlying middleware, while another part might have to be included and transmitted alongside the application data by the ``rmw`` implementation.
For instance, DDS natively supports all of it for pub/sub through DDS sample info, but the client request metadata needs to be wrapped alongside the service response data by the ``rmw`` implementation.
``email`` natively supports all of this metadata, which is included in standard email headers (i.e., not in the email body).

.. _rmw-impl-guide_typesupport:

> Type support

Reviewer 4: This entire section about type support is sorely needed, so thanks for putting it together.

While it does lay out a good bit of information about type support, I think it is missing 2 things:
1.  Why someone would choose the static vs. dynamic typesupport, and
2.  The fact that almost all production RMWs are static .

I think for those two points, it is enough to expand on the point that static typesupports are more performant.  It may also worthwhile to point out that adding new static typesupports is possible, but an orthogonal concern to writing an RMW.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, this is a pretty useful thing to expand on. What do you think of this? b9fbd8f3a3afa112b0a01ce691237657f11ada74

Reviewer 4: Looks great, thanks!

Static type support involves generating middleware-specific code for each interface.
For example, ``rosidl_typesupport_fastrtps_cpp`` generates code to serialize/deserialize C++ classes of each interface type into CDR using `Fast CDR <https://github.com/eProsima/Fast-CDR>`_ for ``rmw_fastrtps_cpp`` to pass on to Fast DDS.
[#fn_ts_fastrtps]_
``rmw_connextdds`` and even ``rmw_zenoh_cpp`` use CDR for serialization, so they use this type support package as well.
On the other hand, dynamic type support involves generating a bit of middleware-independent code that provides generic information about each interface type.
[#fn_ts_dynamic]_

This information can be used at runtime by any ``rmw`` implementation to interpret a type-erased pointer to data: names & types of fields, functions to read from/write to fields depending on their type, functions to get the size of an array field, etc.
For C++, this is ``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_cpp``, which is used by ``rmw_fastrtps_dynamic_cpp`` (hence the "dynamic" part), for example.

> Dynamic type support is generally slower than static type support at runtime, but it is does not require generating middleware-specific code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For C++, this is ``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_cpp``, which is used by ``rmw_fastrtps_dynamic_cpp`` (hence the "dynamic" part), for example.
Dynamic type support is generally slower than static type support at runtime, but it does not require generating middleware-specific code.
```

Author: oops, thanks! See 09a4af018f0210a249033f35f2bfb42865249aaf

The graph cache belongs to the ``rmw`` context, so it is initialized when ``rmw_init()`` is called.
This context indirectly belongs to the ``rclcpp`` context (e.g., initialized by ``rclcpp::init()``), so there is usually only one graph cache per process.

Since DDS-based ``rmw`` implementations are very similar in this regard, they share a common graph cache implementation in the ``rmw_dds_common`` `package <https://github.com/ros2/rmw_dds_common>`__.
It uses an internal topic (usually ``ros_discovery_info``) to share information about new entities.
``rmw_zenoh_cpp`` `creates a Zenoh liveliness token <https://github.com/ros2/rmw_zenoh/blob/rolling/docs/design.md#graph-cache>`_ with the entity type & info and shares it with other participants.

Events
^^^^^^

Users can provide callbacks for publishers & subscriptions to be triggered by the middleware (but executed by the client library) on certain events (``rmw_event_type_t``), such as :ref:`quality of service-related events <about-qos_qos-events>` and :ref:`pub-sub match events <about-qos_matched-events>`.
Some of these events could be triggered on relevant changes to the graph cache.

Security
^^^^^^^^

> :doc:`Security <../../Concepts/Intermediate/About-Security>` is not extremely specified by the ``rmw`` interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most of :doc:`Security <../../Concepts/Intermediate/About-Security>` is not specified by the ``rmw`` interface.
```

Author: Isn't the meaning different? I meant that security is part of the interface, but it isn't well specified. This suggested change means that most of the features are not specified by the interface, meaning that they are specified by something else.

Reviewer 4: Hm.  I actually thought it was both that it wasn't well-specified, but what is specified is done by sros2.  But I could be wrong.  Maybe @ahcorde can add some context, since he did the security implementation for `rmw_zenoh`?

Author: Yeah, I think that's it. As far as `rmw` is concerned, security is not well-specified; that stuff is under sros2. So that's kind of 2 different-but-complementary points, and I was focusing on the `rmw` part.

What about combining them? That would probably be even more useful for readers/implementers. See 7adc97efa79192a0d3eb3fd868345af3f773caf9
